when I was a kid the disaster we worried
about most was a nuclear
war that's why we had a barrel like this
down in our basement filled with cans of
food and water when the nuclear attack
came we were supposed to go downstairs
hunker down and eat out of that
Barrel today the greatest risk of global
catastrophe doesn't look like this
instead it looks like
this if anything kills over 10 million
people in the next few decades it's most
likely to be a highly infectious virus
rather than a
war not missiles but
microbes now part of the reason for this
is that we have invested a huge amount
in nuclear deterrents but we've actually
invested very little in a system to stop
an
epidemic we're not ready for the next
epidemic let's look at Ebola I'm sure
all of you read about it in the
newspaper uh lots of tough challenges I
followed it carefully through the uh
case analysis tools we use to track
polio
eradication and as you look at what went
on the problem wasn't that there was a
system that didn't work well enough the
problem was that we didn't have a system
at all in fact there are some pretty
obvious uh key missing pieces we didn't
have a group of epidemiologists ready to
go who would have gone seen what the
disease was see how far it had spread uh
the case reports came in on paper was
very delayed before they were put online
and they were extremely
inaccurate we didn't have a medical team
ready to go we didn't have a way of
Preparing People now medicine s
Frontiers did a great job orchestrating
volunteers but even so we were far
slower than we should have been getting
the thousands of workers into these
countries and a large epidemic would
require us to have hundreds of thousands
of
workers there was no one there to look
at treatment approaches uh no one to
look at the Diagnostics no one to figure
out what tools should be used as an
example now we could have taken the
blood of survivors process it and put
that plasma back in people to protect
them uh but that was never
tried so there was a lot that was
missing and these things are really a
global failure the who is funded to
monitor epidemics but not to do these
things I talked
about now in the movies it's quite
different there's a group of handsome
epidemiologists ready to go they move in
they save the day but that's just pure
Hollywood the failure to prepare could
allow the next epidemic to be
dramatically more devastating than Ebola
let's look at the progression of Ebola
over this
year about 10,000 people died and nearly
all were in the three West African
countries there's three reasons why it
didn't spread more the first is there
was a lot of heroic work by the health
workers they found the people and they
prevented more infections the second is
the nature of the virus Ebola does not
spread through the air and by the time
you're contagious most people are so
sick that they're
bedridden third it didn't get into many
urban areas and that was just luck uh if
it had gotten into a lot more urban
areas uh the case numbers would have
been much larger so next time we might
not be so lucky uh you can have a virus
where people feel well enough while
they're infectious that they get on a
plane or they go to a market the source
of the virus could be a natural epidemic
like Ebola or it could be biot terrorism
and so there are things that would
literally make things a thousand times
worse in fact let's look at a model of a
virus uh spread through the air like the
Spanish Flu uh back in
1918 so here's what would happen it
would spread throughout the world very
very quickly and you can see there's
over 30 million people die from that
epidemic
so this is a serious problem we should
be concerned but in fact we can build a
really good response system we have the
benefits of all the science and
technology that we talk about here we've
got cell phones to get information from
the public and get information out to
them we have satellite maps where we can
see where people are and where they're
moving we have advances in biology that
should dramatically change the
turnaround time to look at a pathogen
and be able to make drugs and vaccines
that fit for that uh
pathogen so we can have tools but those
tools need to be put into an overall
Global health system and we need
preparedness the best lessons I think on
how to get prepared are again what we do
for war for soldiers we have full-time
uh waiting to go we have reserves that
can scale us up to large numbers a NATO
has a mobile unit that can deploy very
rapidly NATO does a lot of War games to
to check are people well trained do they
understand about Fuel and Logistics and
the same radio frequencies so they are
absolutely ready to go so those are the
kinds of things we need to deal with an
epidemic what are the key pieces uh
first is we need strong Health Systems
in poor countries uh that's where
mothers can give birth safely kids can
get all their vaccines but also where
we'll see the outbreak very early on we
need a medical Reserve Corps lots of
people who' have got the training and
background who are ready to go with the
expertise and then we need to pair those
medical people with the military taking
advantage of the military's ability to
move fast do Logistics and secure
areas we need to do
simulations germ games not war games so
that we see where the holes
are the last time a germ game was done
in the United States was back in 2001
and it didn't go so well so far the
score is germs one people
zero finally we need lots of advanced
R&D in areas of vaccines and Diagnostics
there are some big breakthroughs like ad
Dino Associated virus that could work
very very
quickly now I don't have an exact budget
for what this would cost but I'm quite
sure it's very modest compared to the
potential harm the World Bank estimates
that if we have a worldwide flu epidemic
Global wealth will go down by over $3
trillion and we'd have millions and
millions of
deaths these Investments offer
significant benefits Beyond just being
ready for the epidemic uh the Primary
Healthcare the R&D those things would
reduce Global Health Equity and make uh
the world more just as well as more safe
so I think this should absolutely be a
priority there's no need to panic we
don't have to hoard cans of spaghetti or
go down into the basement but we need to
get going because time is not on our
side in fact if there's one positive
thing that can come out of the Ebola
epidemic it's that it can serve as a
early warming a wakeup call to get ready
if we start now we can be ready for the
next
epidemic thank
you